.. !split

Making a Django application
===========================

.. index::
   single: Django; installation

We recommend to
download and istall the latest official version of Django from
`<http://www.djangoproject.com/download/>`_. Pack out the tarfile, go
to the directory, and run ``setup.py``:

.. code-block:: text

        Terminal> tar xvzf Django-1.5-tar.gz
        Terminal> cd Django-1.5
        Terminal> sudo python setup.py install

The version in this example, 1.5, may be different at the time you
follow these instructions.

Setting up a Django project
---------------------------

.. index::
   single: Django; making a project

Django applies two concepts: *project* and *application* (or *app*).
The app is the program we want to run through a web interface. The
project is a Python package containing common settings and
configurations for a collection of apps. This means that before we can
make a Django app, we must to establish a Django project.

A Django project for managing a set of Django apps is
created by the command

.. code-block:: text

        Terminal> django-admin.py startproject django_project

The result in this example
is a directory ``django_project`` whose content can be explored
by some ``ls`` and ``cd`` commands:

.. code-block:: text

        Terminal> ls django_project
        manage.py django_project
        Terminal> cd django_project/django_project
        Terminal> ls
        __init__.py settings.py urls.py wsgi.py

The meaning of the generated files is briefly listed below.

   * The outer ``django_project/`` directory is just a container for your project. Its name does not matter to Django.

   * ``manage.py`` is a command-line utility that lets you interact with this Django project in various ways. You will typically run ``manage.py`` to launch a Django application.

   * The inner ``django_project/`` directory is a Python package for the Django project. Its name is used in import statements in Python code (e.g., ``import django_project.settings``).

   * ``django_project/__init__.py`` is an empty file that just tells Python that this directory should be considered a Python package.

   * ``django_project/settings.py`` contains the settings and configurations for this Django project.

   * ``django_project/urls.py`` maps URLs to specific functions and thereby defines that actions that various URLs imply.

   * ``django_project/wsgi.py`` is not needed in our examples.

Django comes with a web server for developing and debugging applications.
The server is started by running

.. code-block:: text

        Terminal> python manage.py runserver
        Validating models...
        
        0 errors found
        March 34, 201x - 01:09:24
        Django version 1.5, using settings 'django_project.settings'
        Development server is running at http://127.0.0.1:8000/
        Quit the server with CONTROL-C.

The output from starting the server tells that the server runs on the
URL ``http://127.0.0.1:8000/``.
Load this URL into your browser to see a welcome message from Django,
meaning that the server is working.

Despite the fact that our introductory
web applications do not need a database, you
have to register a database with any Django project. To this end,
open the ``django_project/settings.py`` file in a text editor,
locate the ``DATABASES`` dictionary and type in the following
code:

.. code-block:: python

        import os
        
        def relative2absolute_path(relative_path):
            """Return the absolute path correspodning to relative_path."""
            dir_of_this_file = os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(__file__))
            return dir_of_this_file + '/' + relative_path
        
        DATABASES = {
           'default' : {
              'ENGINE': 'django.db.backends.sqlite3',
              'NAME': relative2absolute_path('../database.db')
           }
        }

The ``settings.py`` file needs absolute paths to files, while it is
more convenient for us to specify relative paths. Therefore,
we made a function that figures out the absolute path to the ``settings.py``
file and then combines this absolute path with the relative path.
The location and name of the database file can be chosen as desired.
Note that one should *not* use ``os.path.join`` to create paths as Django
always applies the forward slash between directories, also on Windows.

Setting up a Django application
-------------------------------

.. index::
   single: Django; making an application

The next step is to create a Django app for our scientific hello
world program. We can place the app in any directory, but here we
utilize the following organization.
As neighbor to ``django_project`` we have
a directory ``apps`` containing our various scientific applications.
Under ``apps`` we create a directory ``django_apps`` with
our different versions of Django applications.
The directory ``py_apps`` contains the
original ``hw.py`` program in the subdirectory ``orig``,
while split of this
program according to the MVC pattern appears in the ``mvc`` directory.

The directory ``django_apps/hw1`` is our first attempt to write
a Django-based web interface for the ``hw.py`` program.
The directory structure is laid out by

.. code-block:: text

        Terminal> cd ..
        Terminal> mkdir apps
        Terminal> cd apps
        Terminal> mkdir py_apps
        Terminal> cd py
        Terminal> mkdir orig mvc
        Terminal> cd ../..
        Terminal> mkdir django_apps
        Terminal> cd django_apps

The file ``hw.py`` is moved to ``orig`` while ``mvc`` contains
the MVC refactored version with the files ``model.py``, ``view.py``, ``compute.py``,
and ``controller.py``.

The ``hw1`` directory, containing our first Django application, must be
made with

.. code-block:: text

        Terminal> python ../../django_project/manage.py startapp hw1

The command creates a directory ``hw1`` with four empty files:

.. code-block:: text

        Terminal> cd hw1
        Terminal> ls
        __init__.py models.py tests.py views.py

The ``__init__.py`` file will remain empty to just indicate that the
Django application is a Python package. The other files need to be
filled with the right content, which happens in the next section.

At this point,
we need to register some information about our application in the
``django_project/settings.py`` and ``django_project/urls.py`` files.

**Step 1: Add the app.**
Locate the ``INSTALLED_APPS``
tuple in ``settings.py`` and add your Django application as a Python package:

.. code-block:: python

        INSTALLED_APPS = (
            'django.contrib.auth',
            'django.contrib.contenttypes',
            ...
            'hw1',
        )

Unfortunately, Django will not be able to find the package ``hw1``
unless we register the parent directory in ``sys.path``:

.. code-block:: python

        import sys
        sys.path.insert(0, relative2absolute_path('../../apps/django_apps'))

Note here that the relative path is given with respect to the
location of the ``settings.py`` script.

**Step 2: Add a template directory.**
Make a subdirectory ``templates`` under ``hw1``,

.. code-block:: text

        Terminal> mkdir templates

and add the absolute path of this directory to the ``TEMPLATE_DIRS`` tuple:

.. code-block:: python

        TEMPLATE_DIRS = (
            relative2absolute_path('../../apps/django_apps/hw1/templates'),
        )

The ``templates`` directory will hold templates for the HTML code applied
in the web interfaces. The trailing comma is important as this is
a tuple with only one element.

**Step 3: Define the URL.**
We need to connect the Django app with
an URL. Our app will be associated with a Python function ``index``
in the ``views`` module within the ``hw1`` package.
Say we want the corresponding URL to
be named ``hw1`` relative to the server URL.
This information is registered in the ``django_project/urls.py`` file
by the syntax

.. code-block:: python

        urlpatterns = patterns('',
            url(r'^hw1/', 'django_apps.hw1.views.index'),

The first argument to the ``url`` function is a regular expression for
the URL and the second argument is the name of the function to call,
using Python's syntax for a function ``index`` in a module ``views`` in
a package ``hw1``.
The function name ``index`` resembles the ``index.html`` main page associated
with an URL, but any other name than ``index`` can be used.

