.. !split

The MVC pattern
---------------


.. index:: MVC pattern


The MVC pattern stands for Model-View-Controller and is a way of
separating the user's interaction with an application from the inner
workings of the application. In a scientific application this
usually means separaring mathematical computations from the
user interface and visualization of results.
The `Wikipedia definition of the MVC pattern <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MVC_Pattern>`_ gives a very high-level
explanation of what the model, view, and controller do and mentions
the fact that different web frameworks interpret the three components
differently. Any web application works with a set of data and needs
a user interface for the communication of data between the user and
some data processing software. The classical
MVC pattern introduces

 * the model to hold the data

 * the view to display data

 * the controller to move data by gluing the model and the view.

For applications performing mathematical computations we find it
convenient to explicitly introduce a fourth component that we call
*compute* where the mathematical computations are encapsulated.  With
the MVC pattern and the compute component we have a clear separation
between data (model), the way data is presented (view), the
computations (compute), and the way these components communicate
(controller). In a small program such a separation may look as
overkill, but it pays off in more complicated applications. More
importantly, the concepts of the MVC pattern saturates the modules and
files of web frameworks so one really needs to adapt to the MVC way of
thinking.

Web frameworks often have their own way of interpreting the
model, view, and controller parts of the MVC pattern.
In particular, most frameworks often divide the view into two parts:
one software component and one HTML template. The latter takes care
of the look and feel of the web page while the former often takes
the role of being the controller too.
For our scientific applications
we shall employ an interpretation of the MVC pattern
which is compatible with what we need later on:

 * the model contains the data (often only the input data) of the application,

 * the view controls the user interface that handles input and output data,
   and also calls to functionality that computes the output given the input.

The model will be a Python class with static attributes holding the data.
The view consists of Python code processing the model's data and HTML
templates for the design of the web pages.

Flask does not force any MVC pattern on the programmer, but
the code needed to build web applications can easily be split into
model, view, controller, and compute components, as will be shown later.
Django, on the other hand, automatically generates application files with names
``views.py`` and ``models.py`` so it is
necessary to have some idea what Django means with these terms.
The controller functionality in Django lies both in the ``views.py`` file and
in the configuration
files (``settings.py`` and ``urls.py``). The view component of the application
consists both of the ``views.py`` file and template files used to create
the HTML code in the web pages.

Forthcoming examples will illustrate how a scientific application is
split to meet the requirements of the MVC software design pattern.

